Okay, welcome back to Gary's Economics
today we are going to talk about Money
okay I've wanted to do this video about money for
a while now and we'll probably do some more videos
about money because it's a big subject area but
the main reason that I came through this video
today is the other day I read an article which was
talking about why are rents up so much in London
and other big cities and this was an article in the
Financial Times uh there's a link to it on my Twitter
if you want to look at it and basically in this
article it spoke entirely about issues regarding
the supply and demand for apartments and that
seems like it makes total sense right you want
to understand why apartment rents have gone up so
you look at the supply and demand for apartments
but I want to give you a thought experiment to
help you maybe understand why to me I think this
is strange now imagine the price of apples went
up relative to oranges so an apple used to cost
the same as an orange and now an Apple costs twice as
much as an Orange and at the same time there's been a
massive massive increase in the supply of oranges
there's been like a massive bumper orange harvest
and then now an apple costs two times an orange as
opposed to one you would say well this is probably
because we've got so many oranges now and if at
the same time everything the price was going up
in terms of oranges you would say well this makes
sense because we've got so many more oranges now
right this would be totally sensible now imagine
we replace that example we take our oranges and
replace it with money imagine suddenly the price
of an apple in terms of money doubled and just
before that there'd been suddenly loads and loads
more money everybody had more money would you
say this is because everybody's got more money or
would you look specifically at something that was
to do with apples now imagine at the same time the
price of everything has gone up relative to money
would you say this is probably because of the
increase in the amount of money everyone has
or would you say well let's look at every specific
thing and try and find out what's going on in that
specific thing now I think it would be sensible
if there was suddenly a massive increase in the
average amount of cash holdings in a country
and then the prices of everything went up
suddenly say this is probably because
such a huge amount of money was given up
but this has happened in the last 3 years
the government's given out £600 billion
which is £13,000 per person so we know thatat
least some people must have hugely more money
and yet the Financial Times runs astory
saying why have London rentsgone up
and it doesn't mention even once thatan
enormous amount of money has been given up
to me I think this is so interesting and it
shows that there's kind of a blind spot in the
minds of a lot of people and a lot of economists
regarding the fact that you know money is a thing
and the value of money can go up and down and
if we suddenly give out a huge amount of money
then the value of money will go down which
would mean the price of everything goes up
um and you know people who watch this channel
regularly will know I was a money trader for along
time and I was a very successful money trader
I was a money trader full-time for six years
um and when you're a money trader all you
do all day is you look at the different
kinds of money you know there's lots
of different kinds of money in theworld
British Pounds (£), US Dollars ($), AustralianDollars
($), Euros (€) and you try and work out whichmonies
are going to become more valuable and which
monies are going to become less valuable so a
huge part of the job is understanding that the value
of money goes up and down and if you do that for
a long time you start to realise that actually
money is one of the most volatile asset classes
that exists, the value can fall very quickly and
one of the reasons for that is there are some big
institutions like central banks: Bank of England,
European Central Bank, Federal Reserve in the US
and governments that have the power to give out
huge amounts of money very quickly which mean
that people suddenly have hugely more money than
they used to have and when that happens you
would expect the value of money to fall but I
think people have a difficulty conceptualizing
an idea of the value of money falling because
people use money to value other things you know
how can the value of a pound fall? a pound is always
a pound but in reality if a huge amount of money is
given out then the value of power can fall and
the way that we see that is that the price of
everything at the same time will go up
which is exactly what's happening now um
what has happened in the last few years isduring
Covid the huge amount of money was given out
the price of everything went up and rather than
say this is probably because of a fall in thevalue
of money people say well rents in London went
up because of issues in the London rental market
and wages are going up because of specificissues
in the labour market and house prices goingup
because of specific issues in the housing market
and food prices going up because specific issues
in the food market and every single individual
thing is blamed on specific issues in that area
and this is super interesting to me and you
know I'm not denying that there are areas
in which there are supply problems so the most
obvious case is energy in Europe there's been a
reduction in the energy coming from Russia into
Europe that's causing energy to go up but it's
not just energy prices going up here you know
London rents are going through the roof and you
know this is not because of Vladimir Putin
or because of the war in Ukraine obviously
um but for me the biggest problem that happens
when you are blind to ideas such as when money
is given out it depresses the value of money is
it also leads you to be blind to other questions
like where did that money go and anyone who
watches this channel will know that I've been
going on about this from the beginning of Covid
which is during Covid a huge amount of money
hundreds of billions of pounds, you know trillions
of US Dollars went from governments to the rich
and the obvious consequence of that is that the
rich get richer ordinary people get poorer
inequality increases and ordinary people find it
harder to live because you as an ordinary person
are competing with the rich for limited resources
if they've got if they've got way more money they
will get more and you will get less um and what that
has meant is because we don't look at money when
these changes happen generally we haven't realised
and it's been very under reported in the media that
in the last three years we've seen massive
massive increases in the wealth of the rich
and super rich in in pretty much every country
in the world it's been the fastest ever increase
in rich and super rich wealth and that's happened
in the UK it's happened in the US it's happened
in Europe and what that has meant has been that
when we've had this inflationary crisis afterCovid
because the media has not generally reportedwhat
an enormous increase in wealth there has been from
the super rich it has meant we have not discussed
taxation of the super rich now the amount of money
that has gone from the government to the super
rich and the rich in this country has so far since
Covid been £600 billion - if we were to tax
that back and just make the rich as rich as they
were before Covid we could give every single
adult in this country £13,000 and thiscrisis
would be over but because we don't talkabout
this massive accumulation of cash by therich
we don't talk about the fact that we could
get that money back and it also means that
the way we resolve the crisis now in Liz Truss'
energy bill recently announced we are going
to give more cash to the rich which will likely
likely make this problem worse so yeah basically
I think it's really important that we understand
that when money is given out we question who it
goes to we understand that if that money goes to
the rich it will make ordinary families poorer
and the ordinary families will see that through
inflation which can also be seen as a reduction in
the value of money which includes a reduction in
the value of your wages if we're not aware to that
then we we allow ourselves to get into situations
where crises are managed in such a way that the
rich get much much much richer ordinary people get
much much poorer and nobody really notices it and
nobody talks about in the media so uh yeah money
is important the rich made a ton of it if we taxthem
back we can make your life better and if wedon't
unfortunately everybody's life is going toget worse
except for the super rich are richer than they've ever
been before. thank you very much like & subscribe...